---
layout: post
title:  "Sources of Microplastics in Local Beehives"
date:   2023-3-11 20:59:54 -0800
categories: Science
tag: featured
seo_title: "Sources of Microplastics in Local Beehives"
excerpt: "From the day it was invented, plastic has grown more popular as a
packaging, prototyping, and production material in every industry. As
this plastic degrades into small particles (microplastics), it may pose
health risks for organisms who come into contact with it. I took samples
of honey from three hives, one without internal plastics, and tested
them for microplastics using Nile Red staining."

---

My entry into the 2023 Contra Costa County Science Fair and the 2023
California State Science Fair. 

![Nile Red stained honey showing presence of microplastics]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/MicroplasticAnalysis.png)


### Abstract: 
From the day it was invented, plastic has grown more popular as a
packaging, prototyping, and production material in every industry. As
this plastic degrades into small particles (microplastics), it may pose
health risks for organisms who come into contact with it. As the
ubiquity of plastics–and as a result, microplastics–increases,
identifying microplastics and their sources becomes more and more
important. Bees are one of the most important pollinators, and can often
travel multiple miles to collect nectar and pollen. Due to the large
distances that they travel–far enough to reach polluted areas–along with
the presence of plastic equipment inside a beehive, honey and other bee
products are at risk for contamination with microplastics. Additionally,
honey is often stored inside plastic containers which can degrade and
release plastic into the honey. Currently, the most popular method for
microplastic detection is Nile Red staining. I identified three main
sources of microplastics in honey: bees collecting plastic while
foraging, the degradation of plastic inside the hive, and contamination
from plastic containers. I took samples of honey from three hives, one
without internal plastics, and tested them for microplastics using Nile
Red staining. I found that hives with internal plastics had 84% more
plastic in their honey samples. Although I did not take enough samples
for a definitive result, my preliminary data indicates that the majority
of microplastics in honey comes from inside the hive.  

[Full document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cJodOGUwOmsOuV_ZmOZpYqQ0qWvwwLHt0tJeJKvzHFI/edit?usp=sharing)

[Pictures](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Ca2S4yihzysqFEDgq5MrA4p19rQvXfApMp3z23Y7hro/edit?usp=sharing)

My project won first place in the biology category, advancing me to the
state competition. It also earned the Dr. David Padgett Award for
Sustainability. 

[County news article](https://contracosta.news/2023/04/25/contra-costa-county-science-and-engineering-fair-results-announced/)

[Official Results (see page 3)](https://ba-leeds.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/2023-Science-Fair-Awards-Listing-for-Webpage.FINAL-v.3.pdf)

![The poster + me]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/ScienceFair.png)
